***

# Motivation Letter

**A sort of rationale of what I want to do with my life**

*Posted on October 2023*

***

Humans need meaning to live. Meaning for them to keep moving in this life. An absence of meaning in one's life leads to nihilism. Nihilism, whatever form it is, leads to the denial of existential reason. The end point of the vacuum of existential reason is death. Death in the physical realm, in the mental realm, or even (if it exists) in a realm other than those two.

To be able to mean one needs value. Value is a set of propositions that guide how one acts. The love of family might be the reason for one to work and make their family live a better life. I should note that what I meant by ‘act’ is not only what the general belief thinks of it as ‘to behave’. It is unfortunate that I can only speak by language. Language is a model or representation that one uses to transfer ideas. Being a model, it is limited in a way that the things that are being modeled are not the complete form of what one wants. Nevertheless, what I meant by act is also 'to perceive'. Depending on the value that one holds, one could see suffering as negative because it hinders their goal, or one could see it as positive because it makes one "better", or borrowing Nietzsche's term, stronger.

Where do our values come from? There are two views on this. One that states values is created as expressed by Nietzsche, and the other believes that values are discovered, which people might associate it with Victor Frankl. Here I argue that it is not important whether or not values are invented or discovered to one's life. What's important is how one possesses a value. For values to be possessed by one, it needs to relate one to things other than one. It should be noted that I'm aware that there is a view that disregards the existence of true external things other than the observer. However, what I'm saying here is other things that are in the mental and in the physical world. Nonetheless, values exist because one relates themselves to the world. Our concept of relation is bounded by our representations, such as our senses. And not only bounded, our representations affect how we relate. Thus values need representations, and representations need values. Hence it is not far from the truth if we see values and representations as one rather than two different things. Hence from here on, I will call values, perception, sensation, meaning as one thing called representation.

---

Everyone needs representation to live. I have my own representations. The representations that I have have been changing throughout my life. The rest of this journal is how I rationale my representation. And to understand my representation, I need to go back to when I was a junior and a highschool student.

Growing up, I'm doing well (arguably) with physics. Just like all children that are good with something, I fell in love with physics (or so I thought). Looking back, I think what made me good (arguably) in physics compared to my classmates was because I can imagine and understand the meaning of formulas in the textbooks. I'm bad at memorizing, that's why I hated Biology that relies on memorizing. And if my teachers directly tell me to master a concept or formula without them explaining the why, I will not understand it. This is because I have to know the reason for it, or in my words: I have to know the representation of it. For example, to understand Newton's I have to imagine a ball that is in a void world, where nothing "touches" it. Then if nothing "touches" it, it will forever be in its original state.

Nonetheless, when I was bored while studying for my highschool physics competition, I was watching YouTube videos on the visualization of Einstein's concept of gravity with a bowling ball in the middle of a trampoline. Then I was mind blown by the idea that matter can be both a particle and a wave. Without realizing it, I was looking for quantum physics, space-time, and the questions regarding life. I decided that I want to understand the world that I live in and I decided I want to be a researcher that focuses on physics. My family opposed me to pursue an undergraduate degree in physics. Because in Indonesia, scientists are less financially stable compared to doctors and engineers. Instead they want me to continue my father's business by becoming a doctor. Possessing a diplomatic nature, I choose to take the middle solution and pursue engineering physics in Bandung Institute of Technology (ITB) as my undergraduate degree. Which is one of the three most desired places to study by students in Indonesia according to the people here. Fortune was at my side and I enrolled as a student of ITB in 2016.

Studying engineering physics in ITB broadened my view of the world, particularly in matters of engineering, science, industry, and education. At a certain time, this representation of mine started to change. It seems that the world is not completely objective but subjective in the sense of how we perceive it. We use different models for a lot of different things. Car manufacturers use Newton's law. But the world of microscopes uses quantum mechanics. If cars can be broken down to particles, then surely quantum mechanics is superior compared to the macroscopic model right? Unfortunately this is not the case. At some point quantum laws failed to explain bigger particles. And it's not only this case, physics fails to explain biology, particularly psychology, problems. It seems that we should model the world depending on the system. If it depends, can it be called truth then? The world, as it turns out, is non-linear, stochastic, and unpredictable.

At the same time I was reading Sapiens by Harari. If I have to choose one book that has shaken my values throughout my entire life so far, it is this book. Though this book is far from perfect due to the fallacies that it made, it succeeded in making me question the generally accepted views of the world. For example, prior to this, I didn't understand Darwin’s theory of evolution. Teachers in Indonesia are either afraid to explain Darwin's theory properly due to its misconception here, or they don't know what Darwin really says. Nonetheless, I was fascinated and started questioning the characteristics that humans now possess and where does it come from. Things such as, where did the first Homo Sapiens arise, why did it arise, why Asia seems to have a relatively diverse culture than Europe, etc. Most importantly, the biggest question that I am trying to solve: which one comes first between language (in general: such as symbol) and thought (in general that include: cognition and consciousness). Because it seems that we can't symbolize without cognition, and we can’t cognize without symbols. Are language and thought just two sides of the same coin?

I also started reading philosophy work. If I have to choose one benefit that I got while studying in ITB is its diversity. We have so many people from many different backgrounds, from religious people to atheists, from nationalists to anarchists. And they are not afraid to trade ideas and to learn from discussions. This environment has foment me to try to read philosophy, a subject that is labeled as controversial in Indonesia, and even in the world. It should also be noted that one of my best friends had recommended me to look for Santa Fe Institute. I didn't know why he recommended this to me at that time but this recommendation will contribute to the development of my representation. At any rate, I came across many great thinkers throughout the world such as Descartes, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche etc. Then in my second year of university, I became agnostic.

Another Harari book that I read is Homo deus. From this I read about AI and machine learning, how they have been used and how they can be used. I decided to learn machine learning on my own from Andrew Ng. in Coursera and other sources. I also take a few classes that contain this subject in my program and other programs. I was amazed (and still) with machine learning's ability to answer complex questions. Complex questions with hundreds and thousands of dependent variables seem manageable due to machine learning. Though people refer to it as machine learning, in my opinion it is a combination of statistics, optimization, and some domain knowledge. I learn to implement neural networks using gradient descent in Matlab and I also learn to make a computer vision program using python. Can AI and machine learning be the key to answering the non-linearity, stochastically, and unpredictability of the world?

The interest in machine learning, cognitive science, and philosophy has led me to work on them in my undergraduate thesis. My undergraduate thesis was about localization of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals using independent component analysis (ICA). In my program, the undergraduate theses are being done by two people. Me and my partner work on ICA-eLoreta localization and I'm in charge of the ICA part. The current procedure of the stroke rehabilitation program does not quantify the neuron plasticity in the brain. So, quantification such as an EEG signal is needed. However, EEG measurements can not point us to the exact location of the signal. In other words, the measured EEG can be a combination of the desired signal and another signal from another location in the brain. Hence the need of blind signal separation to localize the source. This is an interdisciplinary topic that requires a domain knowledge of signal processing, statistics, informatics, and neuroscience. Little did I know at that time that this thesis is my introduction to the world of complex systems, such as the use of entropy in ICA and Kullback-Leibler divergence.

Approaching my graduation, I was still undecided on whether to pursue a master's degree or not. My consideration at that time was why do I even want a master's degree? Let alone the program, I wasn't even sure that I needed a master's degree. It's true that my goal in highschool was to be a researcher. But this goal is already blurred with the subjectivity of the world. I also do not know what I would like to focus on in my research. Maybe a data science program because I like data science? Then what if my love for data science is gone, the same as my love for physics? In the end, I postponed my application and instead chose to work as a data scientist as my first job to have a taste of what it's like to be a data scientist and also, if I am being honest, because it pays relatively a lot.

My first job was as a data scientist in a biotechnology company. Here I work on microbes data such as the amount of bacteria and viruses in a customer sample. I also work on the customer questionnaire data, where do they live, what kind of lifestyle do they have. The idea is that we can quantify customer health based on their microbes sample and lifestyle. There are, obviously, many problems that I encountered. The lack of data compared to the amount of features, the imbalance of the dataset, and learning new domain knowledge which is genetics. But there are also many things that I learned in this job. I learned how to implement XGBoost model to predict customer health. I also learned how to use SQL to query data from databases. In summary, my first job succeeded in introducing me to the world of a data scientist.  Things were going well and I estimated that I would apply to either a master's or a bigger company in about two years. However, I felt  a void was lurking within me.

Earlier, I wrote that humans need meaning to live. A vacuum of meaning led to the denial of existence. I lost one of my meanings on 14 February 2021, when my father passed away. The first few hours after he was gone, I did not feel anything. I did not even feel sad, there were just so many things I had to do. However, a few days later a void started to crawl inside me. The void then completely engulfed me. It is the void of meaning. I questioned my entire life. What should I do with my life? One by one, my friends started to be busy with themselves. Should I follow them and be busy myself? Busy on what exactly? And why do I even need to be busy? Is research and capital what I really want? What if I just lied to myself and I did not want research or capital? I want to talk to my dad about this. But what happened to my dad now? Is he really gone? And what if someday my mother is gone too? Then who or what should I put my meaning into? These questions all revolve around one thing: “what do I want with my life?”. It seemed like everything had no point. Any things that I tried to put meaning into are crumbled. I did not know whether God exists or not. The world is so unpredictable and chaotic. Little did I know, back then I became super-nihilist. A super-nihilist is someone that does legitimate both objective values or subjective values. Finally, I decided to take a step back and rethink what I really want with my life. Though part of this was because my mother had no one else back in town and I was the only one out of my siblings that had no other responsibility.

During these two years, I have been trying to find my representation in this life. For some reason I found myself busy with Prof. Westfall's book on advanced statistics. In my opinion, this is one of the best statistics books in explaining statistics from philosophy to practice. I learned that the heart of statistics is estimation and what statistics have been trying to do is to model the uncertainty of the world. I learned that no statistics model is true and all models have bias and variance. Well, this seems superficial but understanding the why of statistics makes me easier to understand the how of the statistical tools. Tools such as maximum a posteriori estimation in the bayesian paradigm, to maximum likelihood estimation and p-values in the frequentist paradigm. I also try to get into formal logic in philosophy, in which I stop before getting into second order logic because I can't understand first order logic. Actually, the goal for me to learn logic was to relate statistics to inductive logic. Another topic that I have been doing is continuing my past interest in cognitive science. In particular, I found that my view is aligned with embodied cognition, that the way we represent things affects our cognition.

I also read non technical books such as Zen Buddhism which led me, ironically, to practicing my religion again which is not Buddhism. I found that practicing my religion  makes me calm down. I read Victor Frankl's work on meaning. In which he describes three types of meaning: to actualize, to experience, and to attitudinise. This is where I make sense of my first meaning. I realized that my first meaning would be to live a simple life, an attitudinal. Not caring of capital success that other people have defined and being content with my own life. On the contrary, I am creating my set of lenses on how I define success and what values I should have. This creation of values, in which Nietzsche also mentioned, has shown me my second meaning.

I want to experience the world through many different lenses or representations, an experiential meaning. I encounter new worlds in fiction such as music, books and video games. All of which have become my hobbies. Understanding the world through many different rational representations. For about 300 years since Descartes, science has adopted reductionism as its sole lens. Frankl argues about the danger of reductionism in science. Reductionism, if practiced blindly, can lead to nihilism. I think this is why I adopted such nihilistic views prior to this. Though I agree that reductionism has benefited us since Descartes, it failed to tackle the modern problem which requires a non-linear, stochastic, and chaotic model. Thus, I dive into the field of complex systems science. I am surprised that complex system science uses properties such as entropy in which I already learned in my undergraduate thesis. I also remembered that one of my best friends once recommended a course of complex system science from the Santa Fe Institute website when I was in university, in which I didn't take his recommendation seriously and just bookmarked it (I'm sorry). So my friend's recommendation and my thesis have been related to complex system science the whole time? The world sure is absurd.

I started working as a Data Analyst for an industrial automation company in which I am still working right now. At first, I expect I will only live a simple life as an analyst and when I'm bored I will just read books or play video games to experience a new world and nothing more. However, there is a fog of void left. And even after a period of decadence, I can't let go of this will within me. It is a will to dedicate myself to educate the world. It seems that this will is not a lie like I thought I did. Learning about complex systems science, statistical estimation, and cognition gives me meaning. In particular I want to lecture and research complex systems science, especially cognition, the statistics of complex systems, and modeling the non-linearity, the stochasticity, and the unpredictability of the world. Beside that, I want to help myself and other people in the fight against nihilism. That's why I write on my website in an attempt to fight nihilism whether inside of me or another person. Currently, I am working on two books. One is about statistics. This book tries to explain statistics from philosophy to theory and the practice of statistics, which I found the inspiration from Prof. Westfall. The reason I am writing this book is because of the lack of "good" statistics books in Indonesia that explain statistics inside-out. The other book I am writing is a philosophy book on representation. Actually, there are many topics that I like to write about but those two books take priority. It also would be an honor for me if I am given the chance to be a lecturer. To achieve that, pursuing a doctorate degree in science increases my likelihood to conduct research in educational institutions. To pursue a doctorate degree in science, I need a master degree because with my current situation, few institutions will ever accept me into their doctorate program as my background is engineering.

Thus is my representation at the time of the writing. However, even if I can't be a researcher or lecturer, I still can and will fulfill my representation by means of other ways. I still write articles and books that I published to my website. That’s why my representation does not rely on power or pleasure. What is my representation? If I have to use a more understandable model to explain it, it would be using Frankl's model of meaning. My three meaning according to Frankl can be summarized using three propositions:
1. Live a simple life and be joyous in the creation of representations.
2. Experience and model the world through different kinds of representations.
3. Research, teach, and write on complex systems science.

All of this in my opinion encompasses one representation: “to fight against nihilism, whether it's in me or another person”.
